Over the years, the number of popular songs have romanticized divorce.
But anyone who has personally experienced the pain and trauma associated with divorce
knows that it couldn't have been part of Jehovah's original purpose.
And in fact, the scriptures indicate that when Jehovah performed the first marriage of
Adam and Eve, he intended for it to be a permanent arrangement.
After all, it was a match made in heaven, so to speak, Jehovah created the man, and then
he created the perfect complement, Eve.
And had they been obedient, Adam and Eve would be married today.
But with their disobedience came a whole range of serious problems, and they impacted the
marriage arrangement in what way.
Well with imperfection came sin, and then death and death ends a marriage.
That's something Jehovah never had in mind.
And further indicating the complications and negative effects of imperfection on marriage
is the provision for divorce found in the Mosaic Law in Deuteronomy chapter 24 verse 1.
So here's a question.
Did the fact that Jehovah made a provision for divorce in the Mosaic Law indicate that
he was relaxing his view or that he had changed his thinking on marriage?
Well his words as recorded in Malachi chapter 2 verse 16, more than 1000 years after the
words recorded in Deuteronomy 24, we find that Jehovah has not changed his thinking.
He stated very simply, I hate divorce.
Now what was the situation in Malachi's day?
The provision for divorce had been distorted and abused, and men were divorcing their wives
on every sort of grounds, resulting in heartbreak, and also in reproach on Jehovah's
name.
I hate divorce.
We can see why Jehovah would have said those words.
Had the situation improved any by the time of Jesus' earthly ministry, and the scriptures
indicate not, and interestingly the secular historian Josephus indicates that men could
divorce their wives on any basis whatsoever, and they did.
So true to form, Jesus forthrightly addressed the subject at least twice in the course
of his earthly ministry as recorded in the scriptures.
The first occasion took place in the year 31 CE sometime after Passover.
Jesus' words recorded in the sermon on the mount, and there he said everyone who divorces
his wife, except on the grounds of sexual immorality, and Mary's another, commits adultery.
Jesus was raising the barher.
Actually when you think about it, under the Mosaic law, sexual immorality, adultery, was
a capital offense that would have brought death.
So the fact that Jesus said sexual immorality is the only basis for divorce, helps us to
appreciate how seriously he and his father view the marriage arrangement.
Now the second occasion in which Jesus addressed the subject came more than a year later,
late in the year 32 CE, and that's the account that we read about in today's text.
The parallel account in Mark chapter 10 shares some additional insight, and we want to take
just a few minutes this morning and analyze Jesus' words in Mark chapter 10 beginning
in verse 2, so we invite you to turn there.
In Mark chapter 10 verse 2, the Pharisees approached intent on testing Jesus, and they asked whether
it was lawful for a man to divorce a wife.
So now the Pharisees are introducing the thought of the law, but Mark reveals that Jesus directed
attention specifically to the Mosaic law.
What did Moses command you?
The Pharisees said Moses allowed the writing of a certificate of dismissal and divorcing
her, so they conveniently remembered the certificate of dismissal part, but they forgot
that divorce was allowed only for very serious matters.
And Matthew's account indicates that by Jesus' day they were divorcing on every sort
of ground.
So how did Jesus address this?
Well he said to them in verse 5, out of regard for your hardheartedness, he wrote this commandment
for you, however, from the beginning of creation, and then you'll notice a quotation
in Mark, so Jesus is now quoting from the Genesis account, he made them male and female,
Genesis 1, 27.
For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother, and the two will be one flush,
Genesis 2, 24, end quote, and then Jesus adds so that they are no longer two but one flush.
Therefore what God has yoked to gather let no man put apart, well the disciples were
impressed by this very high standard that Jesus was explaining.
When they were again in the house they began to question him about this, and Jesus again
forthrightly makes the point.
He said to them, whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against
her, and if ever a woman after divorcing her husband marries another she commits adultery.
Why do you think Jesus might have insisted that the Pharisees focus on Moses' words?
Well it certainly provided him an opportunity to clarify the matter, didn't it?
And to restate Jehovah's thinking on the sacredness of marriage.
And Jesus added these words, what God has yoked to gather, let no man put apart.
So Jehovah is personally interested in each marriage, and that elevates the relationship
as well, doesn't it?
So what can you and I learn from Jesus' words that will help us if we're married or if
we're single and contemplating marriage?
Here are two points.
Jesus made very clear that his followers would be elevated and hold to Jehovah's original
standard for marriage, not the corrupted standard that the Jewish religious leaders promoted.
And by introducing this thought that Jehovah is involved, he helped us to see the seriousness
of the situation.
And the Apostle Paul and his letter to the Ephesians confirmed that Christians would hold to
Jehovah's original standard for a man and a wife.
And that the only valid basis for a scriptural divorce would be sexual immorality.
Here's a second point, Jesus put Christian men and women on equal footing morally speaking.
Both husband and wife would be responsible for protecting their marriage and for upholding
the sanctity of marriage.
And we find Jesus' words in Mark 1012 interesting as well.
If ever a woman after divorcing her husband marries another, she commits adultery.
But Jesus makes clear that a faithful servant of God who is a woman can divorce an adulterous
husband.
That would have been food for thought for Jewish men and women in Jesus' day.
How we appreciate Jesus' view and Jehovah's view of marriage, here at Bethel we have many
married couples.
And in the congregations around the earth, faithful men and women who respect and cherish
the sanctity of marriage.
And we're so glad for that and determined whether married or single to uphold Jehovah's
view of the sacred marriage arrangement.